README.md, before:

Router.js
=========

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/ramiel/router.js.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/ramiel/router.js)

Discover on [Ramiel's creations](http://ramielcreations.com/projects/router-js/ "Ramiel's creations page")

Router.js is a simple yet powerful javascript plugin to handle hash fragment in order to route request.
Router.js helps you to intercept request done trough fragment and match them using string or regular expressions.

##Basics

Include Router.js in your application

####Standard

```html
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/router.js">
```

####RequireJS
```javascript
//Example
require(["router", ...], function(Router, ...) {
	var router = new Router();
	//...
});
```


according to your directory template.

Now just define a simple route. A route is made of two components

* Matching string/regexp
* Callback

Let's see

```javascript
var router = new Router()
   	.addRoute('#/users', function(req, next){
		/* Do something */
	});
```

There are three noticeble aspects. Your router object and all its functions are chainable. So after an `addRoute` Route you can chain onther one and so on.
The matching string is '#/users', so if your fragment match this pattern your callback will be fired.

Callback is populated with two arguments:

* `req`
* `next`


req is an object containing

1. `href`, which is the url that matched
2. `params`, all the params recognized in the url. We will talk about this in a while
3. `query`, all the params passed as regular html query string

What if more than a route match your url? Well, the next parameter will be populated with a function you can call to execute the next route which match. Elsewhere next is null

**Note**:
```
Method `addRoute` has many aliases. You can use also: `add`, `route`, `get`!
```

###Options

Router constructor accept an object for options

```javascript
var options = {ignorecase: true}
var router = new Router(options);
```

Valid options:

1. `ignorecase` : The router do not consider casing. Default: `true`


###Parametric route

Let's see this:

```javascript
router
	.addRoute('#/users/:username', function(req,next){
		var username = req.params.username;
	});
```

well, if the called url is 'http://www.webapp.com/#/users/john', then `username` in the callback will be 'john'!

You can use as many params you want, they will appear in the `params` property of `req` object.


###Query string

Using previous example if we call 'http://www.webapp.com/#/users/jhon?key=value&foo=bar' then in req `query` will be populated and will be the following object

```javascript
...
query: {
	key: 'value',
	foo: 'bar'	
}
```
so you can write
```javascript
router
	.addRoute('#/users/:username', function(req,next){
		var foo = (req.query && req.query.foo) ? req.query.foo : 'not foo';
	});
```

###Req.get - One method to get them all
Instead of looking in req.params and in req.query, you can use `req.get( key, default_value )` method.
It will look in params, the in query. If nothing has found you can provide a fallback value or `undefined` will be returned.

```javascript
//Calling #/users/john?age=25
router
	.addRoute('#/users/:username', function(req,next){
		var username = req.get('username'); //will be 'john' because is found in params
		var age = req.get('age',18); //will be 25 because is found in query
		var surname = req.get('surname','Snow'); //will be 'Snow' because of provided default value
		var address = req.get('address'); //will be undefined
	});
```

###Special symbols

The other symbol you can use in your route is `*`. It matches every word before next backslash.
Consider:

```javascript
router
	.addRoute('#/users/*', function(req,next){
		/* First word after /users/ will match this route */
	});
```

Now all of this url will match the rule:

* http://www.webapp.com/#/users/john
* http://www.webapp.com/#/users/asdasd
* http://www.webapp.com/#/users/lua

The url http://www.webapp.com/#/users/john/foo will not match! Remember that I've said 'before next backslash'!
To match even it you must use the `**` matcher. It means **everything**

```javascript
router
	.addRoute('#/users/**', function(req,next){
		/* Everithing after /users/ will match this route */
	});
```

All of this urls match the rule:

* http://www.webapp.com/#/users/john
* http://www.webapp.com/#/users/john/snow
* http://www.webapp.com/#/users/john/snow/wolf

##Next argument

Considering this routes:

```javascript
router
	.addRoute('#/users/:username', function(req,next){
			var username = req.params.username;
			if( username != 'admin' && next instanceof Function)
				next();
				
	})
	.addRoute('#/users/*', function(req,next){					
		alert('You are not admin!');
	});
```

As you can see both the routes match the url `http://www.webapp.com/#/users/john`. In Router.js only the first declared match will be called unless you explicitly
call next, then also the second match will be fired and so on. Remember, `next` will be a function only if another route matches.

Next will be useful also to fire erros, we will see this in a while, after talking about error handling

**Note**:
```
Have you noticed that addRoute are chainable? This is true for every router methods!
```

##Error handling

We can handle errors just like http protocol handle it, by http codes.
An example is better than million words

```javascript
router
	.addRoute('#/users/:username', function(req,next){
		/*do something*/
	})
	.errors(404, function( err, href){
		alert('Page not foud!' + href );
	});
```

In this example if we point browser to `http://www.webapp.com/#/route/inexistent` no route will match our url. Router.js will fire a '404' error.
You can subscribe to 404 situations just with `.errors(404, function(err,href){...})`

Router will match for you 404 and 500 situation but will fire a general error for all http code you forgot to register

##Befores

Sometimes you just want to execute some actions before the route matches and then continue on regular matches. Then `before` is what you need.

```javascript
router
	.before(function(req,next){
		if( userIsLogged() === true)
			next();
		else
			next( new Error('User not logged'), 403);
	})

	.addRoute('#/users/:username', function(req,next){
						/*do something*/
	})
	
	.error(403, function(err, href){
		console.error('While attempting to access to '+ href +' the following error happened: '+err.message);
	});
```

`Befores` will be executed before normal route. If `next` is called in before then the route is followed, else if `next` is called with an error then the error is fired and the route is not followed.
You can specify even error type (403 in this case), elsewhere it will be a 500

You can add as many `befores` you want, they will be fired sequentially when you call `next`

```javascript
router.before(function(){...})
	  .before(function(){...});
```

Remember that in before req has just `href` property cause is the only you know at before time. 
		  
##This meaning

Context inside callback, befores or errors have no special meaning to avoid complexity. If you need to force your context inside a callback you can use `bind`.
Bind is the browser implementation or our if missing. Let's see at an example

```javascript
function(){

	this.property = 'foo';
	
	var router = new Router()
					.route('#/mine/route', function(req,next){
							var p = this.property;
							console.log(p); /* will print 'foo' */
							router.redirect('#/'+p);
					}.bind(this));

}
```

If you need your router inside a callback just refer to it as router.
Have you noticed redirect method? Well it's time to talk about utility methods

##Utility methods

In Router.js are present some utility methods.

- `redirect`
```javascript
router.redirect(url)
```

this will redirect your application to desired url firing routes normally

- `setLocation`
```javascript
router.setLocation(url)
```

this will redirect your application to desired url **WITHOUT** firing any routes!

- `play` `pause`
```javascript
router.pause();
document.location.href='/#/ignore/me'; //This will be ignored until you call play
router.play();
```

`Pause` stop router to react to hash changes. `Play` ripristinate router functionalities.

##RegExp

We already said that you can use regular expression to better match your route

```javascript
router.addRoute(/#\/foo\/bar\/?(.*)/i, function(req, next){
	
	/* req gained splats property which contains an array with all your custom matches*/
});
```

So calling 'http://www.webapp.com/#/foo/bar/custom' will follow the route and in req you will find a property called splats.
Splats is an array containing all regexp matches (everyting between two '( )' ). In this cas `req.splats[0]` is `custom`

You can use regular expression to obtain more grain fined routes but it's up to you to handle them correctly


##Run and Destroy

Router has a special method. You can call run after you have setted all your route to immediately launch routes parsing.
Run has a parameter, 'startUrl'. If is setted it will redirect immediately to that url, alse it will read current browser url.
If you do not call run Router will do nothing until next fragment change.

```javascript
router
	.addRoute('#/users/:username', function(req, next){
	  /* code */
	})
	.run('#/');
```
If you need to dispose a router, you have to call `destroy` to remove any event handler and then simply set router to `null`

```javascript
router.destroy();
router = null;
//all clean
```

#Why

* I've used different router like library but some do too few, other too much. I need a little, clear script which do the essential.

* Code written using Router.js is higly readable

##Compatibility
Desktop:

- Chrome 5.0+
- Firefox 3.6+
- Safari 5.0+
- Opera 10.6+
- IE 8+

Mobile:
- iOS Safari 4.0+
- Android 
	- Browser 2.2+
    - Chrome all
    - Firefox all
- IE all
- Opera Mobile 11.0+
 
	
## Author

[Fabrizio 'ramiel' Ruggeri](http://ramielcreations.com/ "Ramiel's creations page")

Commit message:

"Next" callback changes
Every route has a "next" callback. In request there is a new parameter
"request.hasNext" which assert the existence of an other matching route.
You can call next even if there is no other matching route passing an
error as parameter.

README.md, after:

Router.js
=========

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/ramiel/router.js.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/ramiel/router.js)

Discover on [Ramiel's creations](http://ramielcreations.com/projects/router-js/ "Ramiel's creations page")

Router.js is a simple yet powerful javascript plugin to handle hash fragment in order to route request.
Router.js helps you to intercept request done trough fragment and match them using string or regular expressions.

##Basics

Include Router.js in your application

####Standard

```html
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/router.js">
```

####RequireJS
```javascript
//Example
require(["router", ...], function(Router, ...) {
	var router = new Router();
	//...
});
```


according to your directory template.

Now just define a simple route. A route is made of two components

* Matching string/regexp
* Callback

Let's see

```javascript
var router = new Router()
   	.addRoute('#/users', function(req, next){
		/* Do something */
	});
```

There are three noticeble aspects. Your router object and all its functions are chainable. So after an `addRoute` Route you can chain onther one and so on.
The matching string is '#/users', so if your fragment match this pattern your callback will be fired.

Callback is populated with two arguments:

* `req`
* `next`


req is an object containing

1. `href`, which is the url that matched
2. `params`, all the params recognized in the url. We will talk about this in a while
3. `query`, all the params passed as regular html query string

What if more than a route match your url? Well, the next parameter will be populated with a function you can call to execute the next route which match. Elsewhere next is null

**Note**:
```
Method `addRoute` has many aliases. You can use also: `add`, `route`, `get`!
```

###Options

Router constructor accept an object for options

```javascript
var options = {ignorecase: true}
var router = new Router(options);
```

Valid options:

1. `ignorecase` : The router do not consider casing. Default: `true`


###Parametric route

Let's see this:

```javascript
router
	.addRoute('#/users/:username', function(req,next){
		var username = req.params.username;
	});
```

well, if the called url is 'http://www.webapp.com/#/users/john', then `username` in the callback will be 'john'!

You can use as many params you want, they will appear in the `params` property of `req` object.


###Query string

Using previous example if we call 'http://www.webapp.com/#/users/jhon?key=value&foo=bar' then in req `query` will be populated and will be the following object

```javascript
...
query: {
	key: 'value',
	foo: 'bar'	
}
```
so you can write
```javascript
router
	.addRoute('#/users/:username', function(req,next){
		var foo = (req.query && req.query.foo) ? req.query.foo : 'not foo';
	});
```

###Req.get - One method to get them all
Instead of looking in req.params and in req.query, you can use `req.get( key, default_value )` method.
It will look in params, the in query. If nothing has found you can provide a fallback value or `undefined` will be returned.

```javascript
//Calling #/users/john?age=25
router
	.addRoute('#/users/:username', function(req,next){
		var username = req.get('username'); //will be 'john' because is found in params
		var age = req.get('age',18); //will be 25 because is found in query
		var surname = req.get('surname','Snow'); //will be 'Snow' because of provided default value
		var address = req.get('address'); //will be undefined
	});
```

###Special symbols

The other symbol you can use in your route is `*`. It matches every word before next backslash.
Consider:

```javascript
router
	.addRoute('#/users/*', function(req,next){
		/* First word after /users/ will match this route */
	});
```

Now all of this url will match the rule:

* http://www.webapp.com/#/users/john
* http://www.webapp.com/#/users/asdasd
* http://www.webapp.com/#/users/lua

The url http://www.webapp.com/#/users/john/foo will not match! Remember that I've said 'before next backslash'!
To match even it you must use the `**` matcher. It means **everything**

```javascript
router
	.addRoute('#/users/**', function(req,next){
		/* Everithing after /users/ will match this route */
	});
```

All of this urls match the rule:

* http://www.webapp.com/#/users/john
* http://www.webapp.com/#/users/john/snow
* http://www.webapp.com/#/users/john/snow/wolf

##Next argument

Considering this routes:

```javascript
router
	.addRoute('#/users/:username', function(req,next){
			var username = req.params.username;
			if( username != 'admin' && req.hasNext)
				next();
				
	})
	.addRoute('#/users/*', function(req,next){					
		alert('You are not admin!');
	});
```

As you can see both the routes match the url `http://www.webapp.com/#/users/john`. In Router.js only the first declared match will be called unless you explicitly
call next, then also the second match will be fired and so on. 
**Note**:
```
Remember to check req.hasNext to know if another route matched!
```

Next will be useful also to fire erros, we will see this in a while, after talking about error handling

**Note**:
```
Have you noticed that addRoute are chainable? This is true for every router methods!
```

##Error handling

We can handle errors just like http protocol handle it, by http codes.
An example is better than million words

```javascript
router
	.addRoute('#/users/:username', function(req,next){
		/*do something*/
	})
	.errors(404, function( err, href){
		alert('Page not foud!' + href );
	});
```

In this example if we point browser to `http://www.webapp.com/#/route/inexistent` no route will match our url. Router.js will fire a '404' error.
You can subscribe to 404 situations just with `.errors(404, function(err,href){...})`

Router will match for you 404 and 500 situation but will fire a general error for all http code you forgot to register.

To fire an error manually call next with an error parameter (and an optional errorCode).
`next` signature is: next( [ err, [err_code] ] )

```javascript
router
	.addRoute('#/users/:username', function(req,next){
		if(something)
			next('Not found',404);
	})
	.errors(404, function( err, href){
		alert('Page not foud!' + href );
	});
```

##Befores

Sometimes you just want to execute some actions before the route matches and then continue on regular matches. Then `before` is what you need.

```javascript
router
	.before(function(req,next){
		if( userIsLogged() === true)
			next();
		else
			next( new Error('User not logged'), 403);
	})

	.addRoute('#/users/:username', function(req,next){
						/*do something*/
	})
	
	.error(403, function(err, href){
		console.error('While attempting to access to '+ href +' the following error happened: '+err.message);
	});
```

`Befores` will be executed before normal route. If `next` is called in before then the route is followed, else if `next` is called with an error then the error is fired and the route is not followed.
You can specify even error type (403 in this case), elsewhere it will be a 500

You can add as many `befores` you want, they will be fired sequentially when you call `next`

```javascript
router.before(function(){...})
	  .before(function(){...});
```

Remember that in before req has just `href` property cause is the only you know at before time. 
		  
##This meaning

Context inside callback, befores or errors have no special meaning to avoid complexity. If you need to force your context inside a callback you can use `bind`.
Bind is the browser implementation or our if missing. Let's see at an example

```javascript
function(){

	this.property = 'foo';
	
	var router = new Router()
					.route('#/mine/route', function(req,next){
							var p = this.property;
							console.log(p); /* will print 'foo' */
							router.redirect('#/'+p);
					}.bind(this));

}
```

If you need your router inside a callback just refer to it as router.
Have you noticed redirect method? Well it's time to talk about utility methods

##Utility methods

In Router.js are present some utility methods.

- `redirect`
```javascript
router.redirect(url)
```

this will redirect your application to desired url firing routes normally

- `setLocation`
```javascript
router.setLocation(url)
```

this will redirect your application to desired url **WITHOUT** firing any routes!

- `play` `pause`
```javascript
router.pause();
document.location.href='/#/ignore/me'; //This will be ignored until you call play
router.play();
```

`Pause` stop router to react to hash changes. `Play` ripristinate router functionalities.

##RegExp

We already said that you can use regular expression to better match your route

```javascript
router.addRoute(/#\/foo\/bar\/?(.*)/i, function(req, next){
	
	/* req gained splats property which contains an array with all your custom matches*/
});
```

So calling 'http://www.webapp.com/#/foo/bar/custom' will follow the route and in req you will find a property called splats.
Splats is an array containing all regexp matches (everyting between two '( )' ). In this cas `req.splats[0]` is `custom`

You can use regular expression to obtain more grain fined routes but it's up to you to handle them correctly


##Run and Destroy

Router has a special method. You can call run after you have setted all your route to immediately launch routes parsing.
Run has a parameter, 'startUrl'. If is setted it will redirect immediately to that url, alse it will read current browser url.
If you do not call run Router will do nothing until next fragment change.

```javascript
router
	.addRoute('#/users/:username', function(req, next){
	  /* code */
	})
	.run('#/');
```
If you need to dispose a router, you have to call `destroy` to remove any event handler and then simply set router to `null`

```javascript
router.destroy();
router = null;
//all clean
```

#Why

* I've used different router like library but some do too few, other too much. I need a little, clear script which do the essential.

* Code written using Router.js is higly readable

##Compatibility
Desktop:

- Chrome 5.0+
- Firefox 3.6+
- Safari 5.0+
- Opera 10.6+
- IE 8+

Mobile:
- iOS Safari 4.0+
- Android 
	- Browser 2.2+
    - Chrome all
    - Firefox all
- IE all
- Opera Mobile 11.0+
 
	
## Author

[Fabrizio 'ramiel' Ruggeri](http://ramielcreations.com/ "Ramiel's creations page")
